[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with someone
who has a total legend for me this is
david burns md david welcome to the show
thanks for having me on i'm psyched dude
i am so excited i encountered your um
book feeling
good about um 18 months ago and have
since that point been desperate to get
you on the show i think it's one of the
most profound books if somebody is
struggling with anxiety depression any
sort of mood disorder and so when you
release the new book feeling great it
was a perfect opportunity to get you on
um i think the the two books together
are really
the most uh certainly the most effective
thing i have ever encountered i think
cognitive behavioral therapy in general
is just beyond extraordinary um
if if i do my job well because i know
you have the information if i do my job
well by the end of this somebody that's
struggling with a mood disorder i think
will be moved forward pretty profoundly
if you don't mind let's start with the
basics what is cognitive behavioral
therapy
and why do you think that it it works as
rapidly as it does
yeah and then after that we can add
what's new and feeling great because
there's a whole new dimension
uh kind of one step beyond cognitive
behavioral therapy but all of the
cognitive stuff is still pure gold and
it goes back to the teachings of
epictetus the greek
stoic philosopher who said
roughly 2 000 years ago that people are
disturbed not by things not by advance
not by what happens to us
but by our views of them
and that idea is so simple and basic
that most people
can't grasp what it means we'll we'll
come back to that in in in a minute
now the second idea is that when you're
depressed and anxious again it's not the
events of your life that are upsetting
you it's it's the messages you're giving
yourself the way you're interpreting
events
and when you're depressed you're giving
yourself messages like i'm not as good
as i should be and there's a lot of
people listening right now who
are thinking that and uh
or if you're shy you may be thinking you
know why am i so shy i'm really screwed
up
there must be something wrong with me
depressed people often feel discouraged
or hopeless and then you're telling
yourself
things will never change
this is my true self i really am a loser
i'll be this way
forever
and
now and the really uh amazing thing that
that's been kind of known what i just
said
more or less for 2000 years but what's
really kind of new and awesome
is that the thoughts that trigger
depression and anxiety are not valid
thoughts depression and anxiety is the
world's
oldest con
and you're you're fooling yourself but
you don't you don't realize it
and then
the final
message from cognitive behavioral
therapy is the very moment you change
the way you think in other words the
moment you can you suddenly see that
those distorted thoughts aren't true and
you stop believing them in that instant
you can change
and so that that was revolutionary and
when feeling good
came out in 1980
uh that was the first book to really
introduce these ideas to the world and
at that time there were only
about 12 cognitive therapists in the
world
and all of us were pretty much
considered quacks
because nobody everyone was saying it's
a chemical imbalance in the brain i've
been working on
research on that
defunct and fraudulent theory at the
university of pennsylvania and we
saw that that really wasn't a true
theory
and then
like so many young psychiatrists i've
been trained in this endless talk just
come and talk talk talk and and that
didn't seem to do anything to my
patients i gave them tons of pills that
didn't seem to do anything for most of
them and then this new drug-free
idea came along and i first heard about
i thought it was quackery too but then i
started going to a weekly seminar by dr
beck at penn he was
kind of creating cognitive therapy
i said i'll just try this with some of
my patients to prove to myself that it
isn't true
and lo and behold they started
recovering like popcorn
i said man there must be something to
this and i gave up my academic
tenure track position at the medical
school to go into private practice and
help help develop it because it was so
darn exciting but that that's the the
cognitive piece and then what happened i
started writing i wrote this book
feeling good just because i was so
excited i want people to know what was
happening to my patients i could barely
believe it myself people who had been
suicidal suddenly
suddenly recovering it was so
so exciting and then
feeling good
finally caught on it and have sold
more than three million copies the
sequel
feeling good handbook has sold another
two million and cognitive therapy has
become the most popular form of
psychotherapy in human history it's it's
it's practiced all over the world and
it's the most researched form of
psychotherapy in human history well that
was the magic as of 1980 and the cool
thing was if
researchers discovered that if they
simply handed my book feeling good to
people going to a medical center for
treatment for severe or moderate
depression
and just say well it's going to be four
weeks before you can see your frank but
in the meanwhile read this book they
found that two-thirds of them recovered
with with with no pills with no therapy
within four weeks and and didn't even
water need therapy
and so great you you point out that if
somebody had told you sort of where
you've come to now in terms of how
rapidly these disorders can be disrupted
that you yourself would have said you
know this guy is a quack they're a con
artist yeah and right what i want to get
to so going back to that first notion
that you talked about that um
nothing is either good or bad but
thinking makes it so right the shakes
are right
yeah and
i honestly when i first heard that i
knew that it played a role like that
seemed pretty self-evidently true to me
but a 100 as a student of the brain i
assumed that this was going to be a
balancing act that was maybe you began a
process
with the thinking but ultimately it
became a hardwiring neurochemical
process and that was where the real
problem lied but in feeling great you
walk through a story that i think is so
profound it's worth talking about here
because this is probably the one people
would be like but what about postpartum
depression that's obviously hormonal
obviously neurochemistry um yeah and
honestly when you started the story in
the book i thought
actually yeah like how is it possible
that that isn't hormonal and
neurochemical
yeah well um all your feelings result
from your thoughts and um
the we don't know how the brain
creates uh depression and anxiety and
these theories like of chemical
imbalance is was just rubbish from the
very start there was never any reason
from a scientific point of view to to to
link depression to a deficiency of brain
serotonin that was a theory this is a
neurotransmitter serotonin and you it's
too low
in depression and so if you raise up
serotonin people will recover and we
discovered that that theory was bunk
when i was doing my research at the at
the medical school because we had a
award for depressed veterans in the va
and and and we did research studies
there
and
increasing their serotonin levels yeah
yeah we we gave them uh half the
veterans got milkshakes they all got
milkshakes every day but half of them
were at least with 20 grams of
l-tryptophan which is 20 times
the amount you you generally get in your
diet and that's the thing that goes
directly from the stomach to the blood
diffuses into the brain and is converted
into serotonin so we caused massive
increases in serotonin in half of the
veterans
and kept them on
this program for you know four or five
weeks
kept measuring their moods the whole the
whole way no it was double blind no one
knew who was getting this massive boost
in brain serotonin and then we broke the
code
to see how the two groups did and there
was absolutely no differences in the
groups and neither of the groups
improved whatsoever
so we published that in the world's top
psychiatry journal
the archives of general psychiatry
and everyone ignored it until about 15
years ago
because it clearly ignored it
well there's money that drives stuff um
and yes
big pharma yeah there's billions of
dollars being made on on this theory
that's that's that's part of it
because
drug companies can generate create a
drug that has some effect on the
serotonin system and then they can get
approval from the food and drug
administration to market it as an
antidepressant but now all of the new
research indicates that the chemicals
called antidepressants actually are not
antidepressants they're just placebos
they're just chemicals with side effects
so they don't outperform
placebos
so we don't know the cause of depression
but the cool thing is is that there's a
chapter in the new book
by mark noble a a neuroscientist
and uh his his
his thinking
is that the new team therapy which it's
like cognitive therapy on steroids you
might say
actually selectively activate people
aren't going to understand they're going
to read team in lower case when it's
actually an acronym just real fast break
it down so cbt cognitive behavioral
therapy team is
t is testing we test patients at the
start and end of every therapy session
and the readers of the new book will
actually take these tests too to trace
changes in their mood while they're
reading the book
e is empathy empathy
will probably never cure anyone of
anything but you've got to have it if
you're doing therapy and i try to create
empathy in the book too by showing
warmth and compassion for for the
readers and a lot of the readers in my
book first book feeling good have
written me probably 50 000
and said you're the only one who
understands me so i think you can get
empathy
out of a book sometimes better than from
a person and then a is assessment of
resistance
and that's the new dimension i've
created in the last 10 or 15 years of my
work at stanford that that's different
from cognitive therapy cognitive therapy
is in the book and it's still as
good as gold but in in addition we've
i've developed new techniques to
eliminate what
i guess
mental health professionals call
resistance which might not make much
sense to the general public but it seems
like when it comes to change we're all
ambivalent
we we want to change and yet we have one
shoot put in the water one foot on the
shore and you can see it clearly
likely take an example when i do
workshops they say how many of you would
like to to lose some weight
and you know all the hands go up
and i say you just made a mistake what
it's not true that you want to lose some
weight
you you definitely don't want to lose
weight there's only two things you can
do to lose weight and they both suck
one of them is
you start eating carrots instead of that
yummy cinnabon you love and the others
you get out and exercise when it's like
it is right now and
the air is horrible or it might be
raining or snowing you want to be thin
and attractive but you don't want to
lose weight you see and that it shows
resistance i mean and it's huge and a
it's also true in depression people are
depressed people it's the worst form of
suffering in the world and they say oh
yeah i'd give anything to to get better
and then i say to them and this is in
the new book well let's say there's a
magic button here you press this magic
button and you'll instantly go into a
state of euphoria with no effort
will you press that button and everyone
says oh yes i'll prep press it
and then i say well we don't have a
magic button but i have some magical
techniques
and i suspect by the end of today's
session we probably can make it all your
negative all your depression anxiety
shame and guilt hopelessness and rage
they're all disappear
all right so let's take this back to the
the post we'll definitely get to that
very counter-intuitive punchline but i
want to i want to put it in what i
consider
possibly the hardest example for people
to get over
postpartum depression obviously hormonal
well yeah
how is that just her thoughts yeah well
um
it's not only her thoughts but her
motivation
to to to be depressed but what she was
telling herself is is
i'm a failure as a mother she was having
trouble with breastfeeding
and i and i shouldn't have mixed
feelings about having a baby because she
wasn't even sure
she she wanted to have have a baby and
then she was telling herself i have the
wrong emotions i should be better at
breastfeeding i'm failing as a mother
she she was beating up on herself and
it's those thoughts not some
presumed hormonal imbalance that's
causing her depression now i can hear
people at home screaming right now that
you're blaming the mother for her
postpartum depression well how do you
respond to that it's never to to blame
anyone self-blame is the cause of
depression it's not the the cure
for depression but it's actually very
liberating to discover
that your depression has resulted from
messages you're giving yourself that are
cruel and untrue
and that in today's session i can show
you how to crush those thoughts
and and get rid of this depression so
you can go into a state of joy
not just feeling less depressed but but
feeling
feeling euphoric but uh
the the goal is never to blame someone
in fact the discovery
that you're wrong when you're depressed
that you're giving yourself unfair wrong
messages is the greatest discovery a
human being can make i can give you a
personal example or we can stick with
the with with the woman with the
postpartum depression because she also
has a person for example does it have
anything to do with trains
trains trains
that was the one two punch of
because my when i first heard you say
that and i thought okay wait a second if
this is true
then i should be able to take somebody
who was clinically depressed two to the
nines and
if they had amnesia that their
depression would instantly go away
and that's probably why
electroconvulsive therapy works
temporarily it's actually not a very
good treatment but you get a memory loss
so you kind of forget your thoughts for
a few hours this is super interesting i
think it would if you tell that the the
train track story um it was
pretty enlightening oh that's a great
one yeah the after i wrote feeling good
this this young man
wrote me and said oh i read your book
feeling good and i just love it but
i can't believe
that a thought
you have to have a thought to have an
emotion he said what if you were stuck
on a railroad track with a train coming
you'd feel terrified and you wouldn't
have to put a thought in your mind
and i
had read that letter
when i was coming home
from the airport in a taxi
and i put it in my briefcase and i was
just reading this this letter
and i thought my gosh i'm i must be a
fraud this makes sense how you know
obviously if something awful happens
you're going to be terrified and you
don't have to put a thought in your head
and oddly enough as we were rounding a
corner about a mile from my house it's
it there's a railroad track
and there was a car on the railroad
track driving on the railroad track
and i saw there there was a freight
train about a mile and a half
away
coming like at 60 miles an hour on that
track and they don't stop
so i said to the taxi driver stop i i
gotta i'll see if i can get that guy off
the railroad track otherwise he'll he'll
be smashed
and so i ran up and you know
it was gravel about you know the
at the edge of the tracks you know it
was kind of elevated a little bit off
the
ground and i went up there and knocked
on the window and the car stopped he was
only going three miles an hour or
something he rolled down this window and
he says oh um
uh can you tell me the the way to city
lion avenue he was an older gentleman
and i said city line avenue you've got
to be kidding me it's eight miles in the
other direction but you're on a railroad
track and there's a train coming you've
got to back up back up so i can get you
off the track cause i wanted to back up
to the road
so he could turn his car and then drive
off before the train hit him and so he
starts backing up and i got him to the
road now that the train is about 30
seconds away and they starts honking its
horn like get out of the way get off the
darn track and he was just perpendicular
to the train
and and so i got in front of him and
waved my hand said back up now back up
you just gotta back up three or four
feet and the train will miss you
and the guy started going forward slowly
and and then the train
put on the whistle non-stop
put on its brakes but it came skidding
and it hit broadside at about 60 miles
an hour
and the the car was ripped in half
and the front half went about 15 feet or
so
from where it had been from the from the
impact and i rushed up to the driver's
window again and all the windows were
smashed and
and i expected to see a bloody
decapitated corpse but the train it hit
just an inch behind his head
and it was going so fast it was kind of
like when you pull a uh
uh
like if there's a glass
on a table and there's a cloth under you
pull the cloth really fast the glass
doesn't fall over and it was kind of
like that and he looked perfectly normal
but there was glass all over
and he said
what direction did you say for city line
evidence and i says you've just been hit
by a train
and uh and he said i have not he says
that's ridiculous
i says oh no
why where do you think all this glass
came from
he says you're right it looks like
somebody broke all the windows in my car
all of a sudden i said where's your back
seat and he turned around he saw that
half of the car was missing
and then he looked at me and he says
where is this train i said it's right
there it's 15 feet from here and the
engineers and they're running here right
now
and he says this is wonderful
and i says wonderful what's wonderful
about he says well maybe i can sue
and then the the engineers came up the
police came the ambulance came
uh i gave my story to to the police
and i went home and i couldn't
understand what what had happened uh and
the next day i was on my six mile jog
and i saw this man
looking through the rubble a younger guy
and i stopped and and uh
i said oh yeah what what are you doing
and and he says well you know
my father was almost killed yesterday
uh he was hit by a train but somebody
saved his life
and and i said well that might have been
me
because i was here and and i was trying
to get him off of the railroad track
and i um
i didn't understand why he was driving
down the railroad track he was asking
how to get to city line avenue and then
the fella said well my dad's had uh
dementia
uh for
quite a few years
and he does he lost his driver's license
five years ago but he forgot and after
dinner
he decided to take the family car for a
drive and he snuck out and went went
driving
and and so that that explained what had
happened but here you have the same
situation
and i had the thought my gosh this guy's
going to get killed you see so i felt
intense panic he had the thought oh this
is great i'm going to earn a lot of
money from a lawsuit so he was feeling
happy same situation different thoughts
radically different feelings
yeah see that when you told that story i
actually thought the punchline was going
to be okay look i'm actually making this
up but you know it illustrates a point
and then to hear that it was really real
um and then there's a it's interesting
because it's really a two-way street
right so you have your thought it
triggers something biological in the
brain so they did a study where they
removed the amygdala on a bunch of
chimpanzees released them back into the
wild that an inability to feel fear and
so within something like within 48 hours
they were all dead because they they
wouldn't have avoided a predator they
wouldn't avoid limbs that were too small
and so you when
if you can disrupt that communication
right because if you think something
negatively you are going to get a
physiological response it and nothing
yeah you're not trying to say that
right yeah to me is is super interesting
so now going back to our woman with
postpartum depression so she's having
these thoughts um they're giving her a
neurochemical cascade where she is
having a physiological response to this
she's confusing the physiological
response with what's actually causing
this
how does she then begin to back out of
that like how does she
the what what is the process the mood
journaling and all of that is going to
help her get out
well there's there's two phases to it
now when i wrote feeling good it was
just how to crush the negative thoughts
but now i think it's worth walking us
through that i think people
understanding the the sort of gist of
the 10 cognitive distortions well sure
let's let's do that then maybe later we
can talk about this amazing new thing
that speeds recovery
so much uh
but but uh
you know she
what is she telling herself well she's
telling herself it's my fault that that
the baby isn't nursing
i i'm a failure as a mother and also
i shouldn't have mixed feelings about
having a child mothers are supposed to
just love their their children
and uh
and those thoughts have all of the
classic cognitive distortions for
example
uh should statements i i i shouldn't
have mixed mixed feelings
um
also
self-blame
it it's my fault that the baby is is
having
trouble uh nursing
that that type of thing and
she had about eight thoughts and they
all had multiple distortions you know
all or nothing thinking looking at
things in black or white
categories emotional reasoning is huge
a lot of people are listening right now
feel depressed
and hopeless so that they feel like
losers so they say i must be a loser i
feel like a loser i must be hopeless i i
feel hope hopeless
she's also involved in mind reading
thinking oh other mothers don't have
mixed feelings other mothers are you
know these ideal ideal mothers
and and so that's the first step is to
recognize that what you're telling
yourself
is not true
it's it's distorted the second thing is
to realize that it's it's kind of
mean-spirited what what you're doing to
yourself
and i used a number of techniques with
her
that were all pretty darn
effective but
one very simple one
is called the double standard technique
like uh i don't remember what i called
her i always disguise people's names and
then i can't remember god i know her
real name but whatever her name was in
the in the book i said imagine that you
were that i was a dear friend of yours
and and i look a lot like you
and i went to the same schools i got the
same grades
and i also have a new baby here and i'm
not you i'm a dear friend of yours and
then uh and she and i said could we do a
little role play like this she said oh
sure and and so i said let's
let's give her a name let's call her
martha and and i'm susan
and and i said uh martha could i talk to
you for a minute
um
i i uh
i i don't know if you're aware of this i
just have a new baby
you know my my husband and i we
we've tried for years and
we
pregnancy didn't happen and we were
almost given up and then all of a sudden
here came the pregnancy now we have this
this beautiful little boy but he he's
having trouble nursing and i i'm telling
myself that uh that this is my fault and
that i'm i'm a failure as a mother
does that seem
pretty valid
and then
my patient who was playing the role of
of herself talking to a dear friend uh
said oh my goodness uh that that doesn't
make any sense at all you know quite a
few mothers and babies have this this
problem and and you know it's certainly
not your fault if if your little boy is
having trouble with with nursing and it
certainly doesn't make you a bad mother
and i said well that's cheering me up a
little bit uh but but i want to make
sure that that's totally true is that
100 true or are you just bsing me
you just
try to cheer me up
and she says no what i'm saying is
totally true
100 true so i said so if it's 100 true
for me
and i'm like a clone of you
then that would be 100 true of you too
is is that right she says yes so i said
write that down we're doing this all in
in writing and i said how much do you
believe what you wrote down in the
positive thought column she says 100
and now how much do you believe the
negative thought that this is my fault
and she said zero percent
and that's kind of how it works but then
i wanted to push it further
and i said okay will you help me on that
one but i have another negative thought
and i want to see what you think see
i'm not always excited about being a
mother
and and tell you the truth i i've had
mixed feelings about pregnancy all the
way along and sometimes i'm real excited
about being a mother and other times i
kind of yearn for my my work and for my
career
and and feel kind of burdened and
and even a little resentful
and
surely that makes me a failure as a
mother right
i mean a mother is supposed to just have
loving felines isn't that right
and she says that's ridiculous
you know
all mothers have mixed feelings about
everything nobody has pure feelings and
if you have mixed feelings that that's
makes you human it doesn't make you a
failure
and i said is that right you mean i'm
entitled to have mixed feelings
even resentment about being a mother i
said she said absolutely
that's human
all mothers feel that way sometimes
i said this are you bullshitting me
you're just blowing smoke in my face and
she says no that's a hundred percent
true and i said write that down
and then how much do you believe this
negative thought i'm a failure as a
mother because i don't always have you
know excited
feelings about
being a mother
and she said zero
and that's the type of thing it's it's
it's learning uh
to treat yourself with
compassion
uh
and kindness and realism rather than
bullying yourself with these distorted
negative thoughts and that that is
really the essence of cognitive
therapy
and then there's this other huge
discovery
from my weekly
training group at stanford i have a
tuesday night training group that's free
for community therapists because most of
them
aren't happy themselves
and they know they're not getting great
results so they can come to stanford
every tuesday and get unlimited free
psychotherapy training and unlimited
free personal therapy for themselves if
they want
and
out of that group has emerged another
massive insight that's i think as as big
and important as cognitive therapy
i mean that changed the world of
psychotherapy
in the 1980s
and i think this is going to cause
another massive revolution in how
psychotherapy is done because we've
discovered
i still use all those amazing cognitive
therapy techniques but we've i've we've
discovered a technique that makes them
work uh
even faster
and uh
that than than cognitive therapy work
because you see in the old days when we
just had cognitive therapy i i would
think if i get somebody
with severe depression better in 6 8 10
12 sessions that was fantastic and it
was
and that's about you know what it took
now
with the new techniques when i work with
people
i generally
generally i'd say 90
95 percent of the time
i see a complete elimination of symptoms
the first time i sit down with them
now that has to be a 90 or
minute session or a two-hour session i
can't do it in an hour
but it but i can do it in two hours and
then it generally one and done you know
that it's a complete course of
psychotherapy and then i do relapse
prevention training and for the most
part the person is is
good to go was the key insight there
that people are resistant that they have
their talk about that talk about the two
different types of resistance this this
to me is that sort of no [__]
approach of like
you know look this is working but there
it could still be better and
acknowledging that people put up
roadblocks and that you found a way
around them
is is so powerful yeah yeah that it's
been mind-boggling because i've never
had so much fun doing psychotherapy
because every almost everyone recovers
just
right the first time i meet with them
when they get high i get high but the
essence of it
see freud called this thing resistance
and
people
talk about
resistance why do people want to be
depressed why do they resist recovery
because half of people have pretty
strong resistance half of people do not
but about half of people will yes but
the therapist and they seem to fight
against
effective treatment
and we used to think we were trained to
think that oh something this is their
identity uh they they see themselves as
a negative person so they're afraid to
let go of their identity or they they
they get secondary gain they like
attention that they get from being
depressed and and things like that or
they like people like feeling sorry for
themselves and these
interpretations of resistance are kind
of uh put downs to the patient and i
don't think they're true in most cases
and they definitely never helped anyone
but what we have found is
realizing something negative about
yourself is not going to help you
yeah yeah yeah yeah if the therapist
convinces you you're just feeling sorry
for yourself you'll you'll feel more
angry and more hurt it's not going to
help you in in any way sometimes there's
a little truth to it sometimes i get
upset i want to feel sorry for myself
for a little while
but uh it's it's not the big thing that
keeps people stuck in depression and and
what what we've discovered let's take
the postpartum
woman that we talked about one of her
core issues is perfectionism she's been
a super high achiever her whole life
and part of her success is that she's
always criticized herself when she falls
short
and so when she's beating up on herself
and saying i'm a failure as a mother and
this is my fault it shows how how what a
loving mother she she really is
and and it shows that she has high
standards and that she wants to do the
very best for for her little boy
and i don't i want to put this back in
the context of something that you said
at the beginning and i said we'll get to
us and i want people to know we're we're
now at this which is that notion of the
magic button
and getting people to
uh positive reframing i believe is the
term that you've given it yeah
where you're taking something that you
would perceive as negative and you're
realizing there actually is something
good so if you can go back to you know
you present people with this they're
just feeling absolutely horrendous and
the most powerful example i think you
have of this is the mother of the little
girl who was shot in the face with a
pellet gun and it explodes one of her or
multiple of her teeth props and multiple
surgeries and the mother had let her go
out to play and so it's like oh man
she's beating herself up over it i never
should have let her go out i'm a
terrible mother you know my daughter is
suffering how could i ever allow myself
to be happy again um
how how did you help her
realize that hitting the magic button
and making all of that anxiety and all
of that you know shame and guilt like
how on earth did you make her see that
guilt and shame and anxiety are actually
positive well that's the really fun fun
thing you see
she'd been suffering for for nine years
since your daughter had been shot at the
age of 12 and she blamed herself that
she said i shouldn't have let her go out
to play that night
uh so i'm a bad mother and just horrible
nine years and so centaur af we
empathized uh i was treating her in
front of a live audience
and
i i said now if there's a magic button
here i said well first of all what do
you want out of this session if a
miracle happens what miracle would you
want she said well i feel better i'm so
so tired of feeling 100 guilty 100
anxious and 100
ashamed 100 depressed and hopeless and
angry
and i said well let's imagine there's a
magic button here and if you press it
you'll be instantly cured with no effort
and you'll go into a state of euphoria
will you press that button
just absolutely i'd press it in a
heartbeat every everyone says that i say
well we don't have a magic button but
i've got some incredible techniques but
i i don't think it would be such a good
idea to use those techniques
and i just said
well why not you know this is what i
need i've been trying for nine years to
get over my my depression i said well
before we use those techniques
let's see what all your negative
thoughts and feelings show about you
that's positive and and also now now
let's say your sadness and depression
to start out with
you've been horribly depressed because
your 12 year old daughter for nine years
has had surgeries and unsuccessful
treatment for post-traumatic stress
disorder and she's been pretty miserable
so if you press the magic button you'll
be joyous and happy
so you're saying you want to be joyous
and happy about the fact that your
daughters are suffering for nine years
she said oh no
that doesn't sound right
so i said what does your sadness show
about you that's positive and awesome
she says it shows how much i love my
daughter
so put that down is that real
is that powerful is that important she
said absolutely
and then
you you're you're telling yourself uh
that the people here in the audience are
judging you that was another one of her
negative thoughts they think you're a
bad mother you think you're a bad mother
what does that thought show about you
that's positive and awesome the fact
that you're concerned that the people in
the audience here may judge you she says
i guess it shows that i want
a
positive
loving relationships with with them
and is that true she says absolutely i
said is that important she says
absolutely so put that down shows that i
want loving relationships with with the
people here in the group and then
you're very self-critical you're beating
up on yourself constantly
i'm a bad mother i'm a failure i i
shouldn't have done this i you know i
should have done
done that what what is that show about
you that's positive and awesome she says
well maybe that i have high standards
i said absolutely is that true she says
yes and i said have you have your high
standards helped you she says oh yes i
do everything i can to help my daughter
and and i got a phd in clinical
psychology i've achieved a lot and i
said is that important and she says
absolutely i said what else does all
this self-criticism show about you
that that's positive and and awesome
and and she says well maybe humility
i'm not like bragging about about myself
i said is that important humility she
says yes i'm a very religious person
that's it's a spiritual principle to put
down humility and then
and you're anxious all the time
if you press the magic button your
anxiety will go away but what are some
good things about your anxiety since it
keeps me vigilant to protect my daughter
daughter the last time i let down my my
guard
she got shot in the face
so i guess you're saying your anxiety is
is your love for your daughter she says
absolutely so she puts that down and
then you're angry is that valid
uh what what are some beautiful things
about your anger she says well
the parents of those boys never should
have let them go out and play with other
children with a loaded rifle
uh
and so so what does your anger show
about you karen that's awesome she said
well i'm like an angry mother bear i'm
gonna protect my daughter i'm not gonna
let those parents get away with with
that and i said is that important she
says absolutely so we came up with a
list of about 25
beautiful things about her depression
and anxiety and shame and guilt and
anger
and hopelessness even the hopelessness
is even a good thing because it prevents
her from getting disappointed getting
her hoops up like it doesn't make sense
that you could sit down with dr burns
for one session and be cured
that's like a snake oil salesman so your
hopelessness shows that you're a
critical thinker
and it prevents you from getting
horribly uh
getting your hopes up and they then get
all
disappointed at the end of the evening
she said absolutely so then i said well
look at given all these beautiful things
about you we've listed 25 beautiful
things about you
that that
that are all expressions
you know of these these negative
feelings that that you have these
negative feelings because of these
beautiful things about you and if you
press that magic button they'll all go
down the drain along with your negative
feelings
is that what you want
she says no i i don't want to suffer but
i don't want to give up all these
positive core values that i have
and then
we said well maybe we can make a little
compromise here
maybe instead of pressing that magic
button we'll have a magic dial and you
can dial them down to a lower level but
not to zero
so so how sad would you want to be at
the end of the evening it's a hundred
right now she said oh ten percent is
enough
they said are you sure that's enough of
you could i sell you on 20.
now i'm in the position of trying to
persuade her to be more upset
you see rather than try to sell her on
something which only would trigger
resistance and then so she dialed them
to zero she felt the shame she didn't
need any shame and one of them she only
needed two percent and some of them she
wanted 10
and that type of thing and now i've made
a deal with her subconscious mind with
her resistance that will dial them down
to these levels but no further and then
i said now karen that i have to advise
you about one thing the techniques we're
going to use are so powerful
that you might overshoot your goals
like your depression may go all the way
from 100 to zero rather than to 10 but
don't worry because if it go if you got
too happy i'll try to i'll help you work
your depression up to 10 before the end
of the evening and then she started
laughing and at that point i knew i had
her
and
then it was easy
then it took about 15 minutes for her to
talk back to the negative thoughts the
same way we role played earlier using
double standard identified the
distortions
and and
she not only
went to zero on everything she actually
went beyond zero and went into a kind of
state of euphoria and the neat thing is
i have all of this on video
and uh i'm going to be showing it in a
couple of presentations for therapists
and one for the general public coming up
too so people have to actually be able
to see these little
uh snippets but that that's how it it
works and uh i want to go a little bit
deeper into the into the um
the resistance so you talked about in
the book how there's two types you've
got outcome resistance you know process
resistance oh yeah a little bit about
that and then i'd also like to better
understand
is it that people are subconsciously
identifying that these actually are good
traits
or is it that they don't want to
confront something negative about
themselves no it's just well um no no uh
confronting something negative about
yourself that that would not be true in
depression and anxiety actually it might
be true when people are angry and
vengeful
uh that were with habits and addictions
but in depression and anxiety the
resistance always results from things
are really
good and beautiful about you
but this thing of outcome and process
resistance is blowing my mind because
you really
got
the new book which is kind of exciting
to me but yes the
there's eight kinds of resistance
there's outcome and process resistance
for four targets depression anxiety
relationship problems and habits and
addictions
outcome resistance is what we just
worked through with karen who who was uh
depressed about her daughter it means
you don't subconsciously you don't want
a good outcome from the therapy
and in this case
because
all of her negative thoughts
were because of what's most loving and
beautiful about about her
but that that's outcome resistance
um outcome resistance for anxiety is a
little different uh the all anxious
patients feel or people feel like my
anxiety is protecting me from something
terrible and if i was cured
you know things with horrible things
would happen
so for example uh i treated a woman with
obsessive-compulsive disorder who who
was washing her hands 100 times a day
thinking she's going to get contaminated
and she wants treatment for that
and then i said well suppose you i press
this magic button and you'll be cured
would you do that she says absolutely
i don't want to see you i said okay so
now you're cured uh and so you're not
going to wash your hands 100 times a day
what's going to happen she says my hands
will get contaminated
and then i said then what will happen
she said well that'll touch my children.
okay and then what's going to happen and
then they'll get contaminated
and that's what what's going to happen
well then they're going to die of
leukemia they'll get leukemia and die
and then she started sobbing i said you
still want to press that magic button
she said oh no no i don't want to press
it and that's the outcome resistance you
see she thought that her anxiety was
protecting her and her children
now
processed
resistance is a little different
process resistance means there's
something you're going to have to do
that you're not going to want to do to
get better see it's
once you've decided i want to get better
that's half you're halfway there but now
what's this thing you're going to have
to do well the thing that the press
patient is going to have to do is
psychotherapy homework
and practicing writing down negative
thoughts doing the exercises in my books
like and feeling good and then the new
feeling great
the crucial thing is to do these
exercises
because that's where you reprogram your
brain that's where the change
really really happens
and and so when i work with people i i
say this is a gentle ultimatum if you
want to work with me you must agree to
do the exercises
if not i'm not the therapist you're
looking for because all i could
specialize is and is quick irreversible
cares
if you want to keep talking endlessly to
somebody without you know changing your
life then i'm not the person you're
looking for
and
and i i lay down the law but in a loving
way and then most people want to stick
with the therapy and they do the
homework and 100 of the patients who do
homework between sessions recover 100 of
patients who refuse to do homework do
not improve or recover so it's a really
a big deal in anxiety the the process
resistance is exposure
the anxious patient will have to face
their fear their their worst fear and
when it's happening it's going to be
terrifying
and if you want me to cure your anxiety
you're going to have to confront your
fears now
in most cases i'll be there with you
i'll go with you to confront your fear
but
you must do that just talking about your
anxiety is not good it's not going to
cure you and i know how important it is
because i myself when i wrote my book
when panic attacks
was all on all the anxiety disorders i
discovered that i've had 11 anxiety
disorders when i was writing it i didn't
realize this
and then in the six months after it came
out i thought of six more
so i've had 17 anxiety disorders i've
had fear of bees blood
horses dogs i used to have incredible
public speaking anxiety this something
like this would have freaked me out
how do you do it with speaking because
if you're going to expose yourself to
speaking the audience is not unconscious
you're you're there you're exposed
is it self-narrative
um how do you how do you do more than
just
motivation is important i use a lot of
techniques but i can tell you how i got
over my own if you have time for another
story yeah please the uh
when i was doing my research on brain
chemistry
i was invited to go to a prestigious
conference in england at oxford
university sponsored by nato
and it was called the advanced study
institute for metabolic compartmentation
in the brain
and i was doing this computer simulation
work on brain serotonin metabolism and
uh
so i was they invited the 80 the top
scientists brain scientists in the world
to go
and then
two younger people who were kind of just
getting started and i was happy to get
one of those two invitations
and i was terrified because
the work that i was doing was
challenging the work coming out of the
national institute of mental health the
laboratory of pre-clinical
psychopharmacology
and
i i could see that their their research
wasn't being done properly
they weren't analyzing the mathematics
that they were using it wasn't correct
and and they didn't have good data they
were losing half they were injecting
radioactivity into rat brains and then
losing half of it
and so i decided to redo those
experiments
properly and i came to the opposite
conclusion
and this was the first research study
i'd ever done
and but i heard that the head of that
laboratory like to humiliate people in
in conferences and that he was going to
be at this conference
and my talk was the last talk of the
conference after four long days of
hearing these brilliant people and i
felt so outclassed
and and then
finally my turn came and the night
before i was so anxious i couldn't sleep
and i wandered around the oxford campus
and owls were like hooting at me
derisively
i was in a panic and i had this fantasy
that i would go up to the podium freak
out
read and mumble my talk
and that he would sit right in front of
the podium and at the end he would jump
in the air and start screaming at me
and i absolutely believed that that
would happen
and all day i waited for my turn and it
was like death and saying i wish i
wasn't here why did i come to this
conference finally they introduced me
and i went up to the podium with my
papers and there he was
right in front of me
sitting in the front row kind of glaring
at me exactly as i had fantasized
and i got so scared i read and kind of
mumbled my talk
and then at the end there was this
silence and the moderator said does
anyone have any questions for the young
doctor
and this fellow jumped out of his chair
and started shouting at me telling me my
work was bs
and i didn't know what i was talking
about and it was just incredibly
humiliating
and then he sat down and the moderator
said does anyone else have any questions
for the young doctor nobody said a word
they said this concludes our conference
we're now going to walk two blocks to
the blah blah blah restaurant for our
celebratory you know banquet or
something
and when i walked there i felt lower
than a piece of dirt
and no one would walk next to me
and when we got there no one would sit
next to me
and it was the most humiliating
experience of my life
and then when i flew back to the united
states halfway across the atlantic ocean
i was finally calmed down enough to
think of what his criticisms were
and i had to thought that guy doesn't
know what the hell he's talking about
that was a bunch of bs he was throwing
at me
and i and i went to talk
to uh my collaborators who'd been
helping me and and one of them was this
fellow at pan a physiologist named
martin prang
and i had heard he was one of the top
two mathematicians in the united states
and he was helping me with the
mathematics behind we were doing
computer simulation of brain serotonin
metabolism it was pretty groundbreaking
what we were doing
and i said i i don't think this guy
knows what he's talking about and he
says david you're exactly right
um his criticisms are just
they do not make sense so we did a few
more simulations and i wrote up my
article and submitted it to a
journal
and then i got a call
this is a little long story but it has a
good conclusion i got a call in about
three weeks from the editor of the
journal and i thought good gosh why are
they recalling they usually don't they
write rejection letters do they call you
up and
call you out and tell you how awful your
article was and he called and he says
listen dr burns we got your article and
something unusual
none of the reviewers had any
suggestions for changing anything in it
and they have unanimously uh
agreed that it needs to be published
it's going to be in our next issue
but i'm wondering could we submit it for
the ae bennett competition this is an
annual competition
for investigators under 35 years of age
on brain research and it's the top of
word in the world and you'll be
competing with uh
nimh the group that
you're uh
criticizing and and
scientists from all over the world could
we submit your paper
i said you sure can
i had no idea
and then he called three weeks later and
he says you're the first unanimous
winner of the inventive
and uh i i just couldn't believe my ears
and and he said can you
give a talk presentation to a thousand
psychiatrists in new york next month
that are at our meeting
to receive the award i said you bet i
can
absolutely and then every night before i
went to bed
i i would start to fantasize you know
blowing it in front of a thousand
psychiatrists then i forced myself to
change the image
and to say instead
to imagine just talking the talk with no
notes
and telling the people how lucky i was
to work with martin prang and
dave brunswick and how howell herring
and
jack jack london
the people on my research team
and how fantastic the discoveries we
made were and how grateful
that i was and what a fantastic
experience it was and i i told them i
wouldn't accept the award unless they
gave me my my other co-authors equal
recipients
which they said they wouldn't do and
then i said i want that i won't accept
the award and they say okay we'll do it
and so so they came to
and and and and i just forced and i
imagine that at the end of my talk
everyone would rush up
with congratulations and stuff just the
opposite deal and i didn't believe it
but i kept forcing myself to think that
way and then when the day came
i i walked up to that podium my wife
came with me to new york from
philadelphia there were a thousand you
know researchers
in the audience and then i told them
about about the research and it just the
how excited i was how grateful i was to
have people of unbelievable brilliance
you know on my research team and what
the implications of the research were
the methods that we had developed to do
this this this research
and at the end everybody rushed up to
the podium
and just you know it was exactly as i
had fantasized it so that that was you
know how i got over another another fear
and then the odd thing was that uh two
or three weeks later this group from
sloan kettering in new york called said
can we come and meet with you and martin
prank in philadelphia
because we have an idea and we want to
see if you think it's it's
ridiculous or theoretically possible
because you see we've been using
mathematics
uh and certain information to
to figure out what's going on inside of
the brain
and they they said that they had wanted
to create something called a cat scan
that that could take images of the
inside of the human brain
using electromagnetic stuff and and did
we think their mathematics was valid and
they think this was possible did we
think this was possible
and i didn't have much to say because i
didn't have the mathematical power of
martin but martin looked at he says yeah
he said this this this is definitely
gonna
gonna work
and then they went and and developed the
world's first uh
cap scanner
so there but anyway that was my uh
my experience with public speaking
anxiety and you know and then
you know once you've had that that
experience uh i i i've had very little
public speaking anxiety since then and
just like this like meeting with you to
me it's just like what a great moment
that says you know i'm old and i'll be
78 in a week and
all i've got
thank you all i've got is the experience
do you see what i mean and what an
experience this is to hang out with you
and to share these stories that may
touch people and change their lives
david i am serious when i say i am so
grateful for your work and you know
what you've managed to put together in
just those two books let alone the rest
of your work um feeling good and feeling
great is is transformational and it was
given to me originally by one of my
employees who had been struggling with
anxiety and he had found this and he
knew that i had struggled with anxiety
so he gave me a copy oh yeah as i was
reading it i was just like oh my god
it's so
step by step it's so
usable it's something that you can
deploy immediately and the more you
interact with it the more sort of
self-evident it becomes just how
powerful it is
and
that last example that you gave of
as you imagine something you are
creating that body response to
what you're thinking of and i said you
know
so many people rehearse failure and so
few people rehearse success and because
you've rehearsed failure you're
beginning to associate this negative
response with this otherwise neutral
thing and so it's no surprise that you
then go and perform exactly the way you
thought you were going to perform so
it's this really rudimentary thing that
i think
nobody has explained as clearly and
simply as you and given the ways to
unwind that and i think feeling great
really
is as breakthrough as you think it is in
terms of dealing with that resistance
and understanding that as a part of the
process of overcoming whatever mood
disorder it is you're struggling with so
again thank you so much for coming on
the show man i i am eager to to see
people adopt the new material i'm sure
it'll be as transformational as the old
so thank you
thank you so much this has been the best
interview i've ever had because of all
the effort you put in it i couldn't
believe how on top of the stuff you you
are and it makes it uh it's such a gift
to the person you're interviewing and it
takes a lot of work and i'm i'm very
grateful
that's very kind it is the least i can
do to show my appreciation for what
you've given the world um it's amazing
all right everybody trust me when i say
every word that i've said is absolutely
true it is astonishing his books will
change your life if you use them
and speaking of things you can use if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care buddy says something
out loud
it's 10 times more powerful than if they
think it
and then as we started to study the data
particularly data that was just
reinforced by christine porath from
georgetown and harvard that negativity
is a multiple of four to seven times
more powerful than positivity
you